---
layout: post
title: "Goals &amp; Routines or: How I've Lost Almost <del>90</del> 100 Pounds"
---

I can no longer count the number of times that I've started writing, deleted, and restarted this post. Although I am proud of myself for what I've accomplished over the past year or so, I'm embarrassed for even having a chance to accomplish it. But putting those feelings aside, maybe reading this will help someone else set a goal, and change their routine for the better.

2012
----

Last year, with my 28th birthday just a few months away, I realized it was time to lose weight. A lot of weight. I kept thinking back about something I read: "once you hit 30, it's a lot more difficult to lose weight". I'm embarrassed to admit that, at this point in my life, I had weighed 265 pounds or so for a while. Oh sure, from time to time, maybe I'd be motivated and lose 10 pounds or so, before snapping back to my usual ways and gaining it back, but for the most part, my weight stayed roughly the same for years.

If you've never been this overweight, it's hard to explain. No clothing I owned fit me and I no longer remembered what it was like to be comfortable. Working from home for years, rarely going out and not really having a social life to speak of, made it easy to ignore this all. But after years of being like this and just concentrating on my work, I had gotten into this routine. And while I'm good at routines, this one just happened to be really bad for me.

So it was time for change. Having tried Atkins when I was much younger, losing weight for six months only to gain even more back than I had lost, I was opposed to trying another diet of this type. In fact, I didn't want to "go on a diet". I wanted to change the way I lived, and perhaps foolishly, I just wanted to do this on my own. I wanted to drink less coffee, eat healthier, and most of all, eat less.

In March of 2012, I put [Weightbot](http://tapbots.com/software/weightbot/) on my first home screen and set a goal of 250 pounds. Instead of eating a bagel with cream cheese for breakfast, despite not being hungry (I soon realized that I was never actually hungry, I just ate to eat), I ate 2 Nutri-Grain cereal bars. Instead of going to Wendy's and getting a bacon cheeseburger and fries, I went to Wendy's and got a salad. Instead of getting a chicken cutlet, cheese, and bacon hero with a sweetened iced tea from my favorite deli, I got a tuna melt on a whole wheat wrap and a bottle of water. Instead of getting something delicious from the restaurant around the corner, I got a chef salad. Instead of having a cookies at night, I had a yogurt.

I simply began substituting everything I ate with something that was healthier (even if it wasn't that much healthier - Wendy's salads, for example). But more than the substitution, I made a point to eat much less than I used to eat. I stopped eating everything on my plate just because it was there. I ate more slowly and tried to be more conscious about when I was actually hungry. I stopped grabbing a snack for no reason while pacing around the office thinking about how to implement a feature for [Limited Run](http://limitedrun.com).

I was lucky in that I very quickly began to noticeably, at least to myself and Weightbot, lose weight. Seeing results is an incredible motivator. It shows that you've made a choice that actually made a difference. Obvious maybe, but important.

I continued updating my goal, first by ten pounds at a time 240, 230, 220, then by less, 215, 210, 205. I continued to try and eat healthier and eat less. Trying to find that point when I was just full. I cut out an afternoon snack. I found that only eating one Nutri-Grain cereal bar for breakfast was satisfying. I continued to iterate on my routine and my goal, getting better each week.

Oddly, I never really got into exercising. I tried, but it didn't really stick. I didn't feel like I was accomplishing anything and convinced myself I was still too overweight for it to matter. Deep down, I wanted to be one of those people that could run every day, but I had a goal already. I didn't share my exact goal of 180 pounds with anyone, but that was secretly my goal and simply by getting into a new routine, I was able to make steady progress toward it. (Having an [english bulldog](http://thomasmango.com/napoleon/) who will only walk a third of a mile with you once every other day didn't help either, but I guess I can't blame him.)

After nine months, I hit 182 pounds and plateaued. I was a little disappointed that I didn't actually get down to 180 pounds, but I decided that losing 83 pounds was an impressive feat and I no longer considered myself overweight (I'm just over 6 feet tall). And if I was being honest with myself, 180 was my really just my secret, far fetched goal, that I never believed I could get close to in the first place. I was damn impressed with 182 pounds.

So, it was the end of the year, I had new clothes that actually fit me (some were even too big) and most importantly, I finally felt comfortable. I felt comfortable with myself and I felt comfortable in public. I'm not ashamed to admit that it feels great when your family sees you and comments on how you lost so much weight. Or even when a complete stranger looks at the photo on your license as you're buying something and asks if you are really the same person. It just flat out feels good. Physically and mentally, losing that weight was (and still is!) amazing.

2013
----

As I wasn't losing any additional weight and it was winter, I decided to ease up. Once or twice a week, I'd eat a bit more than I had been eating previously, or perhaps get something that I really used to enjoy eating. I must stress that, unlike before my weight loss last year, I did this consciously. I continued keeping track of my weight, although not every day, and decided I would be okay so long that I didn't go over 190 pounds.

Now, I should be clear that although I lost a lot of weight, I hadn't been exercising and wasn't in shape at all. Not even in the slightest. On top of that, I became (I suppose I always was?) a weakling. My 55 pound bulldog could now drag me anywhere at will. There's no stopping him. But I did need some time to reset myself. I needed time to adjust to my new weight, and relax a bit, and enjoy being comfortable, and try and understand how to maintain my weight while keeping things balanced.

The months went on. Without much effort, I gained a few pounds, lost a few pounds, gained a few pounds. In May, however, I hit that magic 190 pounds. Maybe it seems obvious to you, but only then did I realize that the only reason I was able to lose the initial weight was because I had an actual goal. I was striving for something. Toward something. So in my mind, staying **below 190 pounds** was not the same kind of goal as getting **down to 180 pounds**. Staying below 190, was more like an alarm. If you hit 190, it's time to take action. It wasn't something I could work toward.

So, I hit 190 and realized staying below 190 wasn't an actual goal. It was time to set one. Setting another weight goal wasn't necessarily what I wanted, though. Last year I lost a lot of weight. But this year? This year I wanted to become a healthy person. I wanted to exercise. I want to turn myself into a runner. I wanted to become someone that had an ongoing routine of always being healthy, about thinking about what I ate, and most importantly, about being active. I didn't want to just sit in front of my desk all day and night writing code (although I bet our [Limited Run](http://limitedrun.com) customers would like that).

My new realistic goal was to be someone who keeps track of their health and who could go out and enjoy running every day. My secret fantasy goal is to run a 10k (was, now that I've told you), but in reality, I just want to keep running and be healthy. So, I bought a [Fitbit Flex](http://www.fitbit.com/flex) and a Couch to 10k app for my phone. I set goals in Fitbit and began tracking how many steps I took in an average day (not many), and what I ate throughout the day. I started walking and increasing my steps and started on the Couch to 10k program. So while I'm still going after a goal, I'm approaching losing weight differently now. Instead of just losing weight, I want to be healthier and keep track of what I'm eating, while I work on being a runner.

In truth, wearing an activity tracker isn't something I ever thought I'd do, but now that I've started, there's something fascinating about wearing a Fitbit on your wrist. It's out of the way, but you're still conscious of it. It's there. You know it's there and it's a subtle reminder that you should eat healthier and that you should be more active. Instead of parking in the closest spot in the lot at the grocery store, you park further away. Instead of taking your dog outside to the curb, you trick that lazy dude into walking a loop around the block. And while, psychologically, using a Fitbit is an incredible thing that will help you make better decisions as you start using it, eventually it just helps you get into a better overall routine. Over time, it becomes less about making conscious choices at each turn and instead lets you train yourself to always be making better, healthier choices, with less effort. Plus, as a nerd, it's also fun. It's fun to keep track of things and chart your progress and look at stats.

After about six weeks or so of keeping track of what I eat and exercising almost every day, I'm already down below 178 pounds, and more importantly, I feel great. Running is actually fun. I look forward to it and am happy at night knowing that I went for a run that day. It's also really rewarding being able to run longer and longer each time I go out.

I'm generally a really private person. I'm embarrassed I used to be so overweight and unhealthy, but I'm really happy with how far I've come in just over a year and I guess I don't really mind boasting a bit now that I'm here. And so if you want to lose weight, start exercising, or just be healthier, you should know know that, even in your late 20's, it's actually possible. If I can lose nearly 90 pounds, there's no telling what you can do if you try. It just takes making attainable goals, getting into a good routine, and constantly updating your goals as you hit them.

I'd love to hear from you, so please feel free to send an email to tsmango over at gmail. Thanks for reading!

Update: Aug 28, 2013
--------------------

I've continued my progress running and eating healthy and have now dropped almost 100 pounds (98) in total. But much more important than that number (in fact I'm actively trying to maintain my weight rather than continue to lose now), however, is my usual running routine has me running 5km, 6 days a week. Also, last week, I ran my first 10km.

When I started, I never expected that I'd be able to do this and keep it going, but once you've seen, and **felt** progress, it really helps to continue your motivation. If you're thinking about making a change to be healthier, I really hope this post proves to you that it's absolutely possible. Even if your work has you sitting behind a desk all day.